=head1 NAME

mp3packer - an MP3 reorganizer

=head1 SYNOPSIS

   mp3packer [options] in.mp3 [out]  
   mp3packer [options] inDir [outDir]  

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<MP3packer> is a program which can rearrange the data within an MP3 to
fulfill specific goals. By default, the program generates the smallest MP3
possible (with the least padding). However, many people also use it to turn
VBR files into CBR for use with players which don't support VBR.

Processes C<in.mp3> according to C<options> and saves the output to
C<out>. If C<out> is a directory, mp3packer will keep the same name as C<in>
but in the C<out> directory. If C<out> is not given, the C<-a> string will
be appended to the file name (see below).

Processes all files ending in C<.mp3> in the directory C<inDir>. This is not
recursive. If C<outDir> is given, all output files will have the same name
in the C<outDir> directory. If C<outDir> is not given, the files will have
the C<-a> string appended to them, and will stay in C<inDir>.

=head1 OPTIONS

The options, if specified, may be any of the following:

=over

=item -b #

Minimum bitrate allowed for output. Defaults to 0, which means all frame
sizes are allowed. If the number given is a valid bitrate, the minimum frame
size will be "dithered" between padded and unpadded frames, depending on
standard CBR rules. If the bitrate given is one more than a valid bitrate,
all frames will be padded. Anything larger than the maximum bitrate will be
clamped to a padded maximum-bitrate frame. All other bitrates will round up
to the next higher unpadded frame.

For example, `-b 129` will result in the smallest allowed frame size being a
padded 128kbps frame. `-b 117` will result in the smallest allowed frame
size being an *un*padded 128kbps frame. If `-b 128` is used with 44100Hz
files, the minimum bitrate will depend on the frame number. Assuming
44100Hz, for 2 frames out of 49 the minimum frame will be unpadded, for the
other 47 it will be padded. All bitrates from 114 to 127 will result in the
smallest frame being an unpadded 128kbps frame. For further clarifications,
see [below](#bswitch).

=item -t

Strip non-MP3 data at the beginning of the file. This will remove some kinds
of ID3v2 tags. Use both `-s` and `-t` to remove all tags.

=item -s

Strip non-MP3 data at the end of the file. Using this option will remove
most tags and any incomplete last frames from the file.

=item -z

This option makes mp3packer partially decode the audio in the file, optimize
the data, then recode it. This method stops decoding before any lossy
transformations take place, and therefore *the `-z` switch is still
completely lossless*. MP3 files have a number of different methods to
compress the data, and most encoders only choose between a few of them. The
`-z` switch will do a brute-force search for the most efficient compression
setting. This guarantees that each frame is as small as it can get, but it
takes *much* longer to repack.

=item -a -vbr

Specify the string to append to the file name if no output file name is
given. If `mp3packer -a "-food" in.mp3` is given, the output will be named
`in-food.mp3`. `"-vbr"` is the default.

=item -u

Updates the input file, and stores a backup to the output file.  So after
`mp3packer -u process.mp3 backup.mp3`, the file `process.mp3` will contain
the packed mp3, and `backup.mp3` will be the same as the original
`process.mp3`. Note that if you don't specify an output file or change the
`-a` option, the original will have `"-vbr"` appended to it, which may lead
to confusion.

=item -f

Force overwriting of the output file, if it exists. When used with the `-u`
option, it will force overwriting the backup file.

=item -r, -R 

As of 1.16, mp3packer will attempt to minimize the bit reservoir when the
`-b` switch is used. The `-r` switch will force minimization all the time,
and the `-R` switch will maximize the bit reservoir at every frame (which
was the behavior before 1.16).  Note that this will not change the size of
the files at all, and has little purpose other than occasionally making
CBR320 files easier to split.

=item --keep-ok [out|both]

Specify which files to keep if no errors occur. `out` will only keep the
output file and will delete the input file, whereas `both` will keep both
files (the default)

=item --keep-bad [in|out|both]

Specify which files to keep if an error occurs. `in` will only leave the
input file and will discard the repacked file. `out` does just the
opposite. `both` keeps both files (default). Note that buffer
under/overflows and sync errors are counted as errors, whereas recompression
errors (if using the `-z` switch) are not.

=item -i

Print info about the input file, then exit. The output location, if
specified, is ignored. See the info section for more details.

=item --nice #

Adjust the priority of the program. Uses a Unix-style range.

=item --debug [in|out|huff|all]

Prints a bunch of debugging info about the files. `--debug in` will report
frame statistics about the input file. `--debug out` will report on how the
file was processed and written.  `--debug huff` will print debug information
about the recompression of frames if the `-z` option is given. `--debug all`
does all three. It is recommended that you redirect the output to a file, as
the information gets quite verbose.

=back

=head1 Info

By specifying the `-i` option, the program will print data about the input
file then exit. No files will be written and the output (if given) will be
ignored. Example printout:

    *** "test/APS.mp3"
    INFO:
     MPEG1 layer 3
     21687 frames
     44100 Hz
     38.281250 frames per second
     566.517551 seconds
     12514543 bytes in file (176.722405 kbps)
     12514126 bytes in MP3 frames (176.716516 kbps) = current bitrate
     93784923 bits of payload data (165.546368 kbps)
     11732617 bytes of payload data (165.680544 kbps)
     76013 bits wasted from partially-full bytes (0.134176 kbps)
     12513349 bytes of MP3 data (176.705544 kbps) = minimum bitrate possible
     777 bytes of padding (0.010972 kbps)
     417 bytes outside MP3 frames (0.005889 kbps)
     1 sync error
     Bitrate distribution:
       32: 9,0
      128: 3641,0
      160: 7691,0
      192: 6700,0
      224: 2736,0
      256: 785,0
      320: 125,0
     Largest frame uses 8478 bits = 1060 bytes = 324.548437 kbps
     Smallest bitrate for CBR is 256

=head2 Explanation:

*** "test/APS.mp3"
  ~ Name of the file processed.
MPEG1 layer 3
21687 frames
44100 Hz
38.281250 frames per second
566.517551 seconds
  ~ Basic properties of the file. All self-explanatory.
`12514543 bytes in file (176.722405 kbps)`
  ~ The number of bytes in the file and the corresponding bitrate.
    This bitrate includes tags and non-MP3 data which can be stripped
    out using the `-s` and `-t` options.
`12514126 bytes in MP3 frames (176.716516 kbps) = current bitrate`
  ~ The number of bytes currently in MP3 frames. This does not
    count tags and broken frames. This is the current bitrate of the
    file.
`93784923 bits of payload data (165.546368 kbps)`
  ~ The bits of payload data. This ignores padding, headers,
    side-info, and tags.
`11732617 bytes of payload data (165.680544 kbps)`
  ~ The bytes of payload data. This is not a direct result of the
    previous line, and in fact is generally going to be a higher
    bitrate than the previous line due to partially-full bytes.
`76013 bits wasted from partially-full bytes (0.134176 kbps)`
  ~ The number of bits wasted from partially-full bytes. The
    bitrate here is the difference between the previous two lines.
    Nothing can be done to "repack" this wasted data.
`12513349 bytes of MP3 data (176.705544 kbps) = minimum bitrate possible`
  ~ The amount of payload data plus headers and side-info. Assuming
    that mp3packer completely gets rid of all padding and non-mp3 data,
    this is the smallest bitrate that can be achieved.
`777 bytes of padding (0.010972 kbps)`
  ~ The total amount of padding in the file. This is the main thing
    that mp3packer tries to get rid of.
`417 bytes outside MP3 frames (0.005889 kbps)`
  ~ The amount of padding and tags outside of MP3 frames. By
    default, everything before the first frame and after the last frame
    is kept, but all non-MP3 data between frames will be discarded.
`1 sync error`
  ~ The number of times when a frame is not found directly after
    the previous frame.
32: 9,0
128: 3641,0
160: 7691,0
192: 6700,0
224: 2736,0
256: 785,0
320: 125,0
  ~ The bitrate distribution of the file. Only the bitrates that
    actually appear in the file wil be listed. The two numbers given
    per line are the unpadded,padded frames. In the above example,
    there are nine unpadded 32kbps frames, and no padded frames of any
    bitrate.
`Largest frame uses 8478 bits = 1060 bytes = 324.548437 kbps`
  ~ Information about the frame with the largest amount of data. If
    the bit reservoir were not used, this would be the smallest CBR
    bitrate possible.
`Smallest bitrate for CBR is 256`
  ~ The smallest value for the -b option that will result in a CBR
    file. This number is generally much less than the previous line due
    to the bit reservoir. It is, however, generally much more than the
    average bitrate because of limitations on the bit reservoir.

=head1 How it works

In normal operation, mp3packer will iterate over the input frames
and choose the smallest frame size which can store all the data
needed. It will therefore minimize the file size by ensuring that
the frames are as the smallest possible. This is actually somewhat
difficult, as the frame size depends on how much of the current
frame's data can be stored in previous frames, and how much space
in the current frame is necessary to store data from following
frames.

=head2 The -z switch:

Whereas the default operation is to choose the minimum frame size
to fit the data, using the `-z` switch will also minimize the data
size. This is completely lossless, and is equivalent to
decompressing a ZIP file and recompressing with a more aggressive
setting. It attempts to minimize the data by doing a brute-force
search for the optimal parameters, so it takes much longer than it
would normally.

=head2 The -b switch:

Setting the `-b` switch will set the minimum bitrate for each
frame. Using this switch will make more room in small frames for
other frames' data, so it will also generally reduce the maximum
bitrate as well. There is no direct control over the maximum
bitrate, since there may simply be too much data to fit into a
smaller frame. The exact format of the parameter is a bit odd: if
the bitrate given is a valid frame bitrate, the minimum bitrate is
dithered between padded and unpadded frames. If the bitrate is one
more than a valid frame bitrate, then the minimum is a padded frame
of bitrate one less than the given. Anything else is rounded up to
the next highest unpadded bitrate. An example table may be simpler
to follow, assuming a 32, 44.1, or 48KHz file:

Parameter given to -b: Resultant minimum frame size:
0-31                   unpadded 32kbps
32                     exactly 32kbps
33                     padded 32kbps
34-39                  unpadded 40kbps
40                     exactly 40kbps
41                     padded 40kbps
42-47                  unpadded 48kbps
48                     exactly 48kbps
49                     padded 48kbps
50-63                  unpadded 64kbps
64                     exactly 64kbps
65                     padded 64kbps

The "exact" bitrates are as follows:

32000,44100,48000KHz: 32 40 48 56 64 80 96 112 128 160 192 224 256 320
Everything else: 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 80 96 112 128 144 160

If an exact bitrate is given, the minimum bitrate will switch between
unpadded and padded frames in order to achieve exactly that bitrate. For 8,
12, 16, 24, 32, and 48KHz files, this uses all unpadded frames.

=head2 The -r and -R switches:

After mp3packer has chosen an output bitrate for a given frame, there is
generally a range of positions to put the actual data. The data can be
packed as much as possible into the previous frame, or it can be set to fill
up the current frame as much as possible.  Usually it is best to put as much
as possible into previous frames, since this will maximize the space
available for any subsequent frames. However, if the minimum bitrate adds
enough padding, there is no reason to cram the data into previous frames;
it's just going to move around the padding.

The default is to pack as far behind as possible if the `-b` switch is not
given, since there is usually no problem filling up the frames. If a minimum
bitrate is specified then the frames are pushed as far up as possible
without affecting any of the following frames.

The `-r` switch will attempt to always push data as far up as possible, even
if a minimum bitrate is not specified. Conversely, the `-R` switch will push
the data into previous frames as possible (note that this was the default
behavior before 1.16).

=head1 AUTHOR

B<Mp3packer> was written by Reed Wilson ("Omion").  This manpage was written
by Rogerio Theodoro de Brito <rbrito@gmail.com>.

=cut
